docs: Adds Terraform provider & modules overview (#19470)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/integrations/terraform.md

---
title: "Terraform Materialize Provider"
description: "Create and manage Materialize objects with the Terraform Materialize provider"
menu:
  main:
    parent: "integrations"
    weight: 11
    name: "Terraform Materialize Provider"
---

> Terraform is an infrastructure-as-code tool that allows you to manage your

Reviewer: Should the first mention of `Terraform` be linked to https://www.terraform.io/.

resources in a declarative configuration language. Materialize maintains a
Terraform provider to help you configure Materialize resources like
connections, sources, and database objects.

## Use cases

Materialize objects can be created through standard SQL queries, but managing

> more than a few components can be difficult to maintain. The Terraform

Reviewer: Instead of the use case being for non-SQL users. Could it be something like "The Terraform Materialize provider allows users to manage the entire life cycle of their resources in a programmatic way. This can be helpful when managing your Materialize account alongside your other cloud resources."

Author: I like this framing and updated the text.

Do you think mentioning 'non-SQL' users comfortable with Terraform is a selling point for the provider? Curious if referencing HCL vs. SQL would be distracting.

Reviewer: I don't think it is worth bringing up. I view HCL and SQL as just very different uses.

AWS PrivateLink.

The [AWS MSK PrivateLink](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-msk-privatelink) and [AWS Kafka PrivateLink](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-kafka-privatelink) modules allow you to manage
your connection to Materialize in a single configuration. With these modules,
you can create a secure connection and add Materialize [resource blocks](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/MaterializeInc/materialize/latest/docs/resources/connection_aws_privatelink) to allow
Materialize to communicate with the PrivateLink endpoint.

### EC2 SSH bastion host

Another method for source connection is to use a bastion host to allow SSH
communication to and from Materialize.

The [EC2 SSH bastion module](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-ec2-ssh-bastion) allows you to configure an EC2 instance with security groups and an SSH keypair. After using the module, you can configure the `materialize_connection_ssh_tunnel` resource, allowing Materialize an end-to-end connection to your source.

### Postgres RDS

You can also create an RDS instance from which you can track and propagate

> changes. The [AWS RDS Postgres module](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-rds-postgres) creates a VPC, security groups, and an RDS instance in AWS. After you run the module, you can create a secret, connection and source with the Materialize Terraform provider for an end-to-end connection to this instance as a new source.

Reviewer 2: I like this section, but it feels out of place. Does it make sense to discuss these separately from the mz terraform provider?

Author: I know the modules are not immediately related to the provider itself, but I think it adds value to see prebuilt examples. Do you think it would make more sense to have an actual end-to-end config with the Materialize provider resources included so it's a complete example?

Author: Added some info to differentiate modules from the provider and hopefully made that clearer. Let me know if this makes more sense now @sjwiesman

## Using the Terraform provider

To use the Materialize provider, you create a new `main.tf` file and add the
required providers:

```hcl
terraform {
  required_providers {
    materialize = {
      source = "MaterializeInc/materialize"
      version = "0.0.5"
    }
  }
}
```

> The Materialize provider is hosted on the [Terraform provider

Reviewer: Also mention that the full documentation for the provider is on the Registry for resource specific configurations.

---
title: "Terraform Materialize Provider"
description: "Create and manage Materialize objects with the Terraform Materialize provider"
menu:
  main:
    parent: "integrations"
    weight: 11
    name: "Terraform Materialize Provider"
---

[Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) is an infrastructure-as-code tool that allows you to manage your
resources in a declarative configuration language. Materialize maintains a

> Terraform provider to help you configure Materialize resources like

Reviewer 3: Related to the thread below that @sjwiesman started, do we want this page to focus just on the provider (materialize objectives) or also the additional modules (external objects)? For now, I'd be in favor of the latter, but we'd have to get clearer about this in the intro and throughout.

connections, sources, and database objects. The Materialize provider is a
Terraform plugin that allows Terraform to interact with the Materialize API.

Materialize also maintains several modules that make it easier to manage your
other cloud resources that Materialize depends on. Modules allow you to bypass
manually configuring cloud resources and are an efficient way of deploying
infrastructure with a single `terraform apply` command.

## Use cases

Materialize objects can be created through standard SQL queries, but managing
more than a few components can be difficult to maintain.  Using Terraform can be
helpful when you manage other cloud resources in collaboration with Materialize.
The Terraform modules below provide the cloud infrastructure foundation
Materialize needs to communicate with components outside of Materialize itself.
The Materialize provider allows users to manage Materialize resources in the
same programmatic way.

You can use the modules to establish the underlying cloud
resources and then use the Materialize provider to build Materialize-specific
objects. A few use cases are captured in the sections below:

> ### MSK or self-managed Kafka and PrivateLink

Reviewer 4: Yes, I created it just a couple of weeks ago:
> https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-rds-privatelink

To get data into Materialize, you need a connection to allow your data source to
communicate with Materialize. One option to connect securely to Materialize is
AWS PrivateLink.

The [AWS MSK PrivateLink](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-msk-privatelink) and [AWS Kafka PrivateLink](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/terraform-aws-kafka-privatelink) modules allow you to manage
your connection to Materialize in a single configuration. The module builds

> target groups for brokers, a network load balancer, a TCP listener, and a VPC. These AWS resources are necessary components for creating a PrivateLink connection.

Reviewer 4: One small remark, we don't create a new VPC, we use the existing VPC that the MSK/Kafka clusters are in. The modules create a **VPC endpoint service** which is actually the AWS Privatelink.

> target groups for brokers, a network load balancer, a TCP listener, and a VPC. These AWS resources are necessary components for creating a PrivateLink connection.

Author: ```suggestion
target groups for brokers, a network load balancer, a TCP listener, and a VPC endpoint within an existing VPC. These AWS resources are necessary components for creating a PrivateLink connection.
```

---
title: "Terraform"
description: "Create and manage Materialize objects with the Terraform"
menu:
  main:

>     parent: "integrations"

Reviewer 3: If we move this page under "Manage", alongside the dbt page, we might also want to:
- Physically move the file to the `manage` directory. 
- Add an alias for redirecting from the previous location.
- Add a `name:` field to the front-matter. Something like `Use Terraform to manage Materialize`. 

@morsapaes, do we need to differentiate the purpose of using Terraform vs. dbt more clearly in the naming? I know there is overlap in that they can both be used to create basic objects, but dbt seems more specifically focused data transformations and ongoing management (like schema migrations in ORMs) vs. Terraforms one-off creations...?

other cloud resources that Materialize depends on. Modules allow you to bypass
manually configuring cloud resources and are an efficient way of deploying
infrastructure with a single `terraform apply` command.

## Terraform provider

To use the Materialize provider, you create a new `main.tf` file and add the
required providers:

```hcl
terraform {
  required_providers {
    materialize = {
      source = "MaterializeInc/materialize"
      version = "0.0.5"
    }
  }
}
```

The Materialize provider is hosted on the [Terraform provider registry](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/MaterializeInc/materialize/latest).

### Authentication

To configure the provider to communicate with your Materialize organization, you
need to authenticate with a Materialize username, app password, and other
specifics from your account.

Materialize recommends saving sensitive input variables as environment variables
to avoid checking secrets into source control. To create a Terraform environment
variable, export your sensitive variable in the terminal:

```shell
export TF_VAR_MZ_PW=yourMZpassword
```

In the `main.tf` file, add the provider configuration and any variable
references:

```hcl

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

variable "MZ_PW" {}

provider "materialize" {
  host     = "yourMZhostname"
  username = "yourMZusername"
  password = var.MZ_PW
  port     = 6875

>   database = "yourMZdatabase"

Reviewer 5: We should add more prominent guidance around what password is expected here. See [this thread](https://materializeinc.slack.com/archives/CURH4E75W/p1686082976034719) for an example of user confusion.

}
```

### Create Materialize resources

The Materialize provider allows you to create several resource types in your

> organization. Resources correspond to Materialize objects and are configured

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
region. Resources correspond to Materialize objects and are configured
```

with the `resource` block in your Terraform configuration file.

For example, to create a new cluster, you would use the `materialize_cluster`
resource:

```hcl
resource "materialize_cluster" "example_cluster" {
  name = "cluster"
}
```

> All the available Materialize resources and documentation can be found in the [Terraform provider
> registry](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/MaterializeInc/materialize/latest/docs).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can find reference documentation for all the resources available in the Materialize provider in the [Terraform Registry](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/MaterializeInc/materialize/latest/docs).
```

## Terraform modules

Materialize objects can be created through standard SQL queries, but managing
more than a few components can be difficult to maintain.  Using Terraform can be
helpful when you manage other cloud resources in collaboration with Materialize.
The Terraform modules below provide the cloud infrastructure foundation
Materialize needs to communicate with components outside of Materialize itself.
The Materialize provider allows users to manage Materialize resources in the
same programmatic way.

You can use the modules to establish the underlying cloud
resources and then use the Materialize provider to build Materialize-specific

> objects. A few use cases are captured in the sections below:

Reviewer 5: Same comment as above; we don't want to make it sound like these modules are officially supported by us. We've added a disclaimer to each module's repo stating just that:

> This is provided on a best-effort basis and Materialize cannot offer support for this module.

@jseldess, what do you think about just listing the modules with links to the repos and `/demos` to make this more understated?

Author: I think clarifying how much support users can expect is fair. Since they are in the demos repo, maybe changing the language in this doc would be more helpful. Something like 

> Materialize has several demonstration modules for some specific use cases. These modules are best-effort and should be used with caution.

secret, connection, and source resources would be similar to the example
Terraform configuration below with output from the module:

```hcl
resource "materialize_secret" "example_secret" {
  name  = "secret"
  value = <your_RDS_password>
}

resource "materialize_connection_postgres" "example_postgres_connection" {
  name = "example_postgres_connection"
  host = <your_RDS_hostname>
  port = 5432
  user {
    secret {
      name          = "example"
      database_name = "database"
      schema_name   = "schema"
    }
  }
  password {
    name          = "example"
    database_name = "database"
    schema_name   = "schema"
  }
  database = "example"
}

resource "materialize_source_postgres" "example_source_postgres" {
  name        = "source_postgres"
  schema_name = "schema"
  size        = "3xsmall"
  postgres_connection {
    name = "pg_connection"
    # Optional parameters
    # database_name = "postgres"
    # schema_name = "public"
  }
  publication = "mz_source"
  table = {
    "schema1.table_1" = "s1_table_1"
    "schema2_table_1" = "s2_table_1"
  }
}
```

> ## Contributing

Reviewer 5: I don't think this is relevant here.
